# boonmee
Posted: 2020/20/07

---

boonmee is a language server for Clojure.

For a first cut, I have focused purely on ClojureScript interop with JavaScript.

The secret sauce in boonmee is leveraging the [TypeScript standalone server](https://github.com/Microsoft/TypeScript/wiki/Standalone-Server-%28tsserver%29) (tsserver) for analysis of all JavaScript interop. 

`tsserver` is officially used by editors such as VS Code to provide intellisense for TypeScript projects (eg, code completions, docstrings etc). Other projects like [coc-tsserver](https://github.com/neoclide/coc-tsserver) provide Vim users with rich features for TypeScript and JavaScript projects.

boonmee provides a similar JSON protocol as `tsserver` which offers features well suited to editors and IDEs. Like tsserver, boonmee is low-level. It is up to developers of editor plugins/IDEs to integrate with boonmee if they so desire.

boonmee doesn't speak the [language server protocol](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/). Nor does tsserver for that matter... and yet, all three things (TypeScript, VS Code, LSP) are owned by Microsoft....hmmm. Anyways, it would be possible to wrap boonmee over a thin LSP client.

To begin with boonmee was built to provide 'intellisense' around JavaScript interop (where no solutions exist currently) - but as I flesh out its implementation, I am starting to think boonmee would be very well suited as a general purpose Clojure language server.

This blog post dives into the implementation details of boonmee, and how I was able to get code completions, quickinfo and jump-to-definition working for foreign JS objects in ClojureScript.

## Why

I write Clojure professionally - and at the end of the day, I use Clojure because it is a better Java.

My day job consists of writing a product that leverages the JVM and its ecosystem (specifically, Apache Kafka). 

That means my day job is about 80% Java interop.

Therefore, I need tools that understand Java. Luckily, [Cursive](https://cursive-ide.com/) does that really well.

I can't imagine using a tool where I can't easily jump to Java source code, or view useful information about Java method calls (deprecations, reflection, etc). Kafka moves fast, and its API surface area is huge.

However, no rich tooling exists for the analysis of JavaScript packages in ClojureScript. Which is where my frustration lies.

The many React component libraries you inevitably bring into your frontend project change at a much more rapid/destructive rate than any Java library!

So boonmee is my attempt to solve the above problem, and maybe I'll learn something new along the way :).

# Implementation

## Step 1: client makes a request

A client request generally includes the following context:

* Type of request (definitions, quickinfo)
* File name
* Line number and offset
* The project's root

## Step 2: analyse Clojure file

The next step is to read in the requested Clojure source code from disk, and parse it using [clj-rewrite](https://github.com/xsc/rewrite-clj).

Right now only some basic analysis is performed:

* What NPM deps does the namespace require
* What JS symbols does the namespace refer to

Along with the analysis, a clj-rewrite zipper of the source code is returned.

The impl is fairly naive right now, and suffers from the same classic problems all other Clojure analysis tools face/must solve:

* Cannot analyse partially complete source code
* Expanding macros and the halting problem

Basically, the current naive approach works good enough for basic editor integration, but not so much for linting. However, a more sophisticated impl for analysing Clojure code can be built over time.

## Step 3: transform

Once we have analysed our Clojure code, we need to translate it into a minimal JavaScript file that the TypeScript compiler can understand/analyse.

Each request type (completions, go-to-definition etc) defines the nodes of the intermediate JS using a tiny, declarative Clojure DSL:

```clojure
[(es6-imports)
 (es6-sym {:loc [3 5]})]
 ```

When we compile our code, `es6-imports` will return the `import ... from ...;` statements inferred from our analysis step.

`es6-sym` will look for any reference to JavaScript interop around `[3 5]` in our Clojure source, and compile it to a stubbed out JS call (eg, `react.useState(...);`)

Each node in the DSL must implement `boonmee.compiler.core/INode` which has a single method: `-compile`. 

Note that we can pass additional context to each of our nodes: 

For example, if you need the line number and offset of the ES6 symbol relative to the compiled JS (eg, for code completions), you can do something like:

`(es6-sym {:loc [3 5] :cursor? true})`

## Step 4: compile

Once we have defined what our intermediate JS should look like, and have analysed our Clojure source code, we can compile down to a `.ts` file!

The compile step is pretty simple - map over every node and compile. Thankfully, the intermediate representation is very simple as you can't define any nested nodes.

The result of the compilation step is a map that looks like:

```clojure
{:js-out java.io.StringWriter
 :line   0 ;; The line of the cursor
 :offset 5 ;; The offset of the cursor
 ...}
```

We can now write the contents of `js-out` to a file the TypeScript compiler can read!

## Step 5: TypeScript compiler RPC

Each handler now asynchronously makes the number of required RPC calls to the TypeScript backend:

For example, this is a tsserver definitions request:

```json
{
  "seq": 0,
  "type": "request",
  "command": "completionInfo",
  "arguments": {
    "file": "/path/to/core.cljs",
    "line": 4,
    "offset": 7,
....
  }
}
```

## Step 6: respond to client

The TypeScript backend is asynchronous. So we listen for any responses from tsserver that are relevant to us. 

When the TypeScript compiler sends a response - we have all the data lined up to respond back to the client:

* The originating boonmee client request
* The intermediate representation/context (Clojure analysis, compiled JS etc)
* The intermediate requests to the TypeScript compiler
* The response from the TypeScript compiler

# Demo RPC

Consider some ClojureScript:

```clojure
(ns tonal.core
  (:require ["@tonaljs/tonal" :refer [Midi]]))

(Midi/m ) ;; [4 7], left incomplete for our completions example
```

A client request for code completions:

```json
{
  "command": "completions",
  "type": "request",
  "requestId": "12345",
  "arguments": {
    "projectRoot": "/path/to/project/root",
    "file": "/path/to/core.cljs",
    "line": 4,
    "offset": 7
  }
}
```

Will produce a response like:

```json
{
  "command": "completionInfo",
  "type": "response",
  "success": true,
  "interop": {
    "fragments": ["m"],
    "isGlobal": false,
    "prevLocation": [4,1],
    "nextLocation": [7,1],
    "sym": "Midi",
    "usage": "method"
  },
  "data": {
    "isGlobalCompletion": false,
    "isMemberCompletion": true,
    "isNewIdentifierLocation": false,
    "entries": [
      {
        "name": "freqToMidi",
        "kind": "property",
        "kindModifiers": "declare",
        "sortText": "0"
      }
      ...
    ]
  },
  "requestId": "12345"
}
```

For more examples, please check out the [Example RPC](https://github.com/wavejumper/boonmee#example-rpc) section in the repos README.

# Further work

Right now 'on the fly' functionality works (as demonstrated above) - but there has been no attempt made to lint ClojureScript files. Linting would enable:

* Warn on undefined es6 method call
* Warn when calling deprecated es6 method (via @jsdoc convention)
* Incorrect arity
* Basic type checking

This likely means a more sophisticated analysis step will have to be implemented in order to support these types of checks.

Longer term, boonmee should be able to support other Clojure hosts (eg, Java).

It should be a matter of switching out the transformation and language server steps. It seems like there are plenty of rich, open source tools for Java in this space (such as the [Eclipse LSP](https://github.com/eclipse/eclipse.jdt.ls)).

And even longer term - why stop at just interop? If boonmee is doing such a good job at analysing foreign functions, it should be able to handle the task of understanding common Clojure!

The source code of boonmee can be found [here](https://github.com/wavejumper/boonmee)